---
title: "The Invisible Hand Condition"
last_modified_at: 2026-01-25T16:10:02-05:00
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Philosophy
  - Minimalism
---

It was back at the start of the Covid Pandemic. Pen in hand, Moleskine open on the round coffee table on the patio. Spinning the newly purchased fountain pen, my face slowly curls into a sight of focused contemplation. As the mild breeze drifts through the perforated screen panels of the Floridian patio, it ruffles my hair in various ways and directions. I didn’t care thought. I sat there, pondering with intensity the words uttered by Matt D’Avella, a minimalism YouTuber, who’s latest video had put me in this state. He spoke about the concepts of minimalism, a life philosophy that, at the time, I had not realized would change my lifestyle’s trajectory forever.

Minimalism. It’s one of those words that is overloaded, misconstrued, and contains with it a heavy set of baggage. Similar in nature to Stoicism or Taoism, Minimalism is a life-philosophy, a framework by which to conduct one’s personal experience, endeavors, and actions. Unlike Stoicism or Taoism, however, Minimalism is also largely conflated with a visual style or design language (and often for a marketing tactic). Often times, products are designed with a minimalist aesthetic and marketed in such a way to convince that more of these minimalist products “will make you a minimalist.” This narrative serves as a wolf in sheep’s clothing. It is  maximalism under the guise of minimalism, a condition of the modern capitalistic society which I am a living, breathing member.

Recognition of the situation was not founded overnight. It was part of a larger process of self discovery and, to be honest, one that continues even in this very moment. I am by no means even close to a perfect minimalist, struggling with all the same problems that continue to plague me daily. This isn’t because I was or am blind to marketing, or unaware of the the concepts of capitalistic systems and their influences. The underlying realization that took a longer period of time was recognizing how I had fallen into the trap myself. The trap of the “Invisible Hand Condition,” an adversarial phenomenon that is fueled by the world’s major players and propagated by modern society all around the globe.

It is the same force that creates hyper consumerism, a symptom of this phenomenon. We within this globalized society are constantly bombarded with advertisements, exaggerated claims that having more is better. Driven by this narrative, we feel as though there is a need to have the latest gadgets or the highest-end products. We are told that we will be respected because of what we own, or that others will favor us more highly due to being a part of the latest trends. It is strongly implied that not being a part of this pattern makes us strange or odd. I have fallen for this narrative, that I too needed the latest gadgets to remain relevant and fit into the society that we are a part of.

Minimalism breaks that narrative cyclic pattern, providing a framework to help make decisions. It is not simply made up of decisions to purge physical belongings, or reduce all possessions to the bare minimum. It is not a cruel taskmaster, driving us to choose not live an enjoyable lifestyle. No, I couldn’t live like that… I do enjoy living a comfortable lifestyle. Minimalism is the practice of value discrimination, that is, choosing to put effort into what truly matters to you as a person. If someone were to see how I spend my time and money, they may not think of me at first as a minimalist. For example, I really appreciate my Apple products (I consider the design much better for me over Windows products). There is a non-insignificant group that wouldn't consider Apple products minimalist, due to their cost. 

That is a misconception of the principle of minimalism. The principle doesn’t care about the cost of a product in the sense of monetary value. Minimalism is concerned about whether or not the product or activity has importance and to make decisions around that. It is the recognition of whether something is valuable to oneself to accomplish their ambitions and to disregard it otherwise. Rather than falling for the narrative to need everything, a minimalist chooses what they deem as truly important to their ambition… ignoring the influence of the general impulsivity that comes from hyper consumerism. Minimalism is the practice of patience, in that it is choosing to wait to make a choice on acquisition or participation until after determining that the choice being contemplated is valuable or not.

Choosing to be a minimalist is not an easy choice. It has seemed antithetical to the social norm of hyper consumerism. The constant barrage of advertisement, staged presentations on the needs that are met by the latest and greatest, the influence of those around us. The challenge is a legitimate one, but an important one that will improve with time. One someone recognized that their value does not rest on the backs of other’s approval or the material things that they acquire, then the weight of that unreasonable expectation gets lighter and lighter. Eventually, one will be happier with far less, because the things chosen will be the things that they truly value the most.

If you’ve made it this far into my blog post, thank you for taking the time to read it. I hope to continue to write, it will take some time to get into the habit… since I had never done this sort of thing long term before. I hope that you’ve taken what I am putting down and picked it up to consider for yourself. I can’t tell you what structures or ways that will make you a minimalist, this is a process that will take time and effort to discover what works for you. I merely write this to describe the problem that affects all: “The Invisible Hand Condition.”
